# Constitution of the Quantitative Life Sciences Association

## Article I - Name 

The name of this organization shall be:  
Quantitative Life Sciences Association (QUALSA)  
Hereinafter referred to as (ie, the “Society”, or the “Association”, etc):  

## Article II - Purpose 

The purposes of the organization shall include:  

* a. To provide representation to the Membership, as appropriate;
* b. To provide a sense of family to the graduate and postdoctoral researchers working
     within the Department;
* c. To promote a sense of belonging among its members so that they
     may easily seek assistance (academic or otherwise), as appropriate;
* d. To arrange a healthy set of activities for its members, so that the participants may
     purposefully benefit from the athletic and recreational nature of an organized event;
     and,
* e. To foster a sense of competition, academic, and otherwise, with equivalent
     organizations outside the Department

## Article III - Membership

All graduate students and Postdoctoral Scholars currently registered in the department of
Quantitative Life Sciences (or "school of" or "programme in", etc.) are regular members
of this Society. Aside from this stipulation, the Quantitative Life Sciences Association
shall not discriminate in any way deemed unlawful or inappropriate by the PGSS
constitution, or McGill University ethics guidelines.

## Article IV - Officers

**4a:** There shall be six (6) executive officers of the Association, hereafter referred
        to as the “Executive”, they are:
* President
* Vice President External
* Vice President Finance
* Vice President Academic
* Vice President Social
* Chair Secretariat

**4b:** The Executive shall be elected annually as per the election guidelines set out in
        this Constitution.

**4c:** The Executive shall be jointly charged with the responsibility of:
* a. Ensuring prudent fiscal management of the Association’s funds.
* b. Producing Council Meeting and General Assembly agendas.
* c. Relaying to Council comments, questions, and concerns of relevance to the Association 
* d. Producing and maintaining guides detailing procedures of individual executive
     functions.
* e.	Providing all documents generated by their respective offices to the Secretariat.
* f.	Maintaining up-to-date website content including:
    * i.	The Association's Constitution
        * ii.	The names and contact information of:
            1. The Executive;
            2. Committee members;
            3. PGSS Councillors

These responsibilities shall hereafter be referred to as the “joint responsibilities of
the Executive”.

**4d:** The duties of the officers shall be as follows:

### President

Further to the joint responsibilities of the Executive, the President shall:

* a. Be the official representative of the Association to all external entities;
* b. Be responsible for all official correspondence with all external entities;
* c. Be familiar with the content of the University’s Handbook of Student Rights and
     Responsibilities, and in particular the Charter of Students’ Rights with respect to
     defending the rights of the Association;
* d. Be one (1) of the two (2) required signing officers;
* e. Maintaining and organize up to date document of the Association’s Constitution;
* f. Compiling meeting agendas with duties including:
    * i) receiving and compiling reports from all other executives and committees;
    * ii) previous meeting records; and
    * iii) agenda items as approved by the Executive.
* g. Be one of the PGSS Councillors for the Association;
* h. Conduct all of the Association’s elections according the procedures and regulations
     specified in this Constitution; and
* i. Chair Council Meetings.
* j. Compile and maintain a list of organizations to which the Association is related, and
     produce records of all procedures and documents required in establishing and
     maintaining such relationships;
* k. Maintain and transmit the records and documentation of the Association’s activities
     required by the PGSS to the appropriate PGSS representative within the deadlines
     stipulated by the PGSS for a Graduate Student Association (GSA);
* l. Verify adherence by the Association to all required regulations concerning the
     activities of a GSA as specified by the PGSS.
* m. Represent the Association when the Association does not have a Vice President
     External

### Vice President External

Further to the joint responsibilities of the Executive, the Vice President External shall:

* a. Represent the Association as Councillor at meetings of the PGSS Council.
* b. Represent the Association at meetings of the PGSS and other graduate student
     associations, when appropriate.
* c. Keep the other Executive Members informed of developments and decisions taken at
     the PGSS Council.
* d. Send a brief report to the Executive summarizing important issues and decisions
     taken at the PGSS Council.
* e. Perform other duties as required by the Executive Board.

### Chair

Further to the joint responsibilities of the Executive, the Secretariat shall:

* a. Be the designated correspondent of the Association to the Membership including:
    * i.	notification of all of the Association’s meetings/assemblies; and
    * ii.	distribution of meeting materials (e.g. agendas).
* b. Act as Recording Secretary for Council Meetings and General Assemblies;
* c. Maintain and organize up to date electronic (where appropriate) and paper (where
     appropriate) records of all of the Association’s documents including:
    * i. financial records as provided by the VP Finance and Operations;
    * ii. Meeting records (agendas, minutes, etc...);
    * iii. Documentation arising from the activities of the Executive;
    * iv. Template and filled forms (e.g. Nomination Forms);
    * v. The Association’s operations manuals.

### Vice President Academic

Further to the joint responsibilities of the Executive, the VP Academic shall:

* a. Plan and execute academic events
* b. Producing and maintaining a list of alumni
* c. Produce and maintain a comprehensive list of facilities and procedures for aiding
     Members in obtaining information and solutions to issues relating to academic
     activities.
* d. Plan and execute social events and activities when the Association does not have a
     Vice President Social

### Vice President Finance and Operations

Further to the joint responsibilities of the Executive, the VP Finance and Operations
shall:

* a. Be one (1) of two (2) required signing officers;
* b. Be responsible for ensuring all financial transactions adhere to the approved
     Association budget;
* c. Maintain official financial records for auditing purposes including:
    * i. Retaining all Financial records for six (6) years after the year of initial
         transaction;
    * ii. keeping the Association’s budget and Constitution for reference; and
    * iii. destroying all financial records after the six (6) years period.
* d. Be responsible for preparing the Association’s yearly budget and final annual
     financial statement;
* e. Administering and maintaining the Association’s assigned facilities and resources.

### Vice President Social

Further to the joint responsibilities of the Executive, the VP Social shall:

* a. Plan and execute social, cultural, and other activities for members of the
     Association.
* b. Coordinate with the Department to plan and execute all social events related to
     Orientation for new students.
* c. Advocate and act as a liaison for all non-academic related matters within the
     Department.
* d. Work in coordination with the VP Academic to ensure an inclusive and supportive
     environment is maintained in all student-life activities.
* e. Promote student involvement in all activities that allow for social, academic, and
     professional networking.
* f. Participate in meetings with other graduate student associations, when appropriate.
* g. Perform other duties as required by the Executive Board

## Article V - Executive

**5a:** The Executive shall be the officers of the Quantitative Life Sciences Association,
        and shall be elected once per year as per the election guidelines set out below.

**5b:** The Executive shall hold office from April 1st of each year until the following
        March 31st

## Article VI - Council

**6a:** The Quantitative Life Sciences Association Council shall be the working body of
        the Quantitative Life Sciences Association between General Meetings.

**6b:** The Council shall be comprised of:
* I. The Executive
* II. All Quantitative Life Sciences Association representatives to PGSS Council (if
      different from the above members).

**6c:** Quorum shall be two-thirds of the Executive with the President and Vice President
        Finance present.

**6d:** Council meetings are open to all members of the Quantitative Life Sciences
        Association.

## Article VII - Representatives

The Quantitative Life Sciences Association shall elect representatives to the PGSS and to
all committees and bodies within the Quantitative Life Sciences on which graduate students
are entitled to representation.

## Article VIII - Finances

**8a:** The Quantitative Life Sciences Association shall conduct fund-raising for such
        programs or activities as it sees fit.

## Article IX - General Meeting

**9a:** The General Meeting shall be called by a decision of regular quorum of council.

**9b:** Notice of a general Meeting shall be given by posting announcements on
        departmental notice boards and by e-mail (where possible) at least one week before
        the meeting.

**9c:** Quorum for the General Meeting shall be 10% of the general membership.

**9d:** All motions shall be passed upon a simple majority of 50% + 1 vote.

## Article X - Elections

The Quantitative Life Sciences Association will utilize the PGSS Simplyvoting platform for
all elections of the executive.

**10a:** Elections shall be held once per year on or before April 1st.

**10b:** Notice of open positions shall be given at least one week in advance of the
         General Meeting.

**10c:** Any regular member of the Quantitative Life Sciences Association may seek
         election for open positions, providing they acquire the nomination of one (1)
         other regular members.

**10d:** Ballot shall be secret, and be counted in the presence of at least two (2)
         non-candidate members.

**10e:** Vacancies during the course of the year shall be filled by by-election, to take
         place at a special General Meeting.

## Article XI - Affiliation

The Quantitative Life Sciences Association shall be affiliated with the Post Graduate
Students Society of McGill University (PGSS), as provided for by that body's constitution.

## Article XII - Adoption and Amendments

**12a:** This constitution has been initially adopted by a two-thirds majority of a
         General Meeting of the Quantitative Life Sciences Association.

**12b:** Amendments to this constitution shall be made at a General Meeting.

**12c:** Notice of proposed amendments shall be posted at least one week before the
         General Meeting.

**12d:** Amendments will be voted on by open ballot, and shall pass by a two-thirds
         majority of those present at the General Meeting.